Add blog for sqfp16 (#2971)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2024-06-19-optimizing-opensearch-with-fp16-quantization.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Optimizing OpenSearch with Faiss FP16 scalar quantization: Enhancing memory efficiency and cost-effectiveness"
authors:
  - naveen
  - vamshin
  - tal

> date: 2024-06-19 00:00:00 -0700

Reviewer: Please update the publish date to 2024-06-27

Author: done

categories:
  - technical-posts

> meta_keywords: FP16 quantization, OpenSearch k-NN plugin, memory optimization, cost-effectiveness

Reviewer 2: suggest you add something about performance, speed, or latency to the meta_keywords

> meta_keywords: FP16 quantization, OpenSearch k-NN plugin, memory optimization, cost-effectiveness, performance, search latency, indexing throughput

Reviewer: @naveentatikonda - Please update your meta with the following: 

_meta_keywords:_ faiss scalar quantization, OpenSearch k-NN plugin, FP16 scalar quantization, vector embeddings

_meta_description:_ Learn how FP16 scalar quantization in OpenSearch helps your generate vector embeddings while reducing memory requirements and minimizing quality loss at a lower cost.

Author: @pajuric in meta description, we are not generating vector embeddings with this feature

Reviewer: @naveentatikonda - I'm fine with your meta changes, but the phrase I pulled was from your blog. You may want to reevaluate that line. If you are good, I will push this to publish.

Author: @pajuric I fixed it. We are good to go. Thanks!

> meta_description: Learn how FP16 Quantization in OpenSearch helps to reduce memory requirements upto 50% with a very minimal loss in quality.

Reviewer 2: upto => up to

has_science_table: true
---

The rise of large language models (LLMs) and generative AI has ushered in a new era of natural language processing capabilities. Vector databases have emerged as a crucial 
component in this landscape, acting as external databases that can efficiently index, store, and retrieve embeddings generated by LLMs. However, as the scale and complexity 
of LLMs continue to grow, vector database workloads have also increased significantly. Ingesting and querying billions of vectors can strain computational resources, 
leading to higher memory requirements and increased operational costs. Faiss scalar quantization enables you to generate vector embeddings with lower precision, which reduces memory consumption and, consequently, lowers costs.

## Why use Faiss scalar quantization?

> When you index vectors in [OpenSearch 2.13](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/blob/main/release-notes/opensearch-release-notes-2.13.0.md) or later versions, you can configure your k-NN index to apply _scalar quantization_. Scalar quantization converts each dimension of a vector from a 32-bit floating-point (`fp32`) to a 16-bit floating-point (`fp16`) representation. Using the Faiss scalar quantizer (SQfp16), integrated in the k-NN plugin, you can get up to a 50% memory savings with a very minimal loss of recall (see [Benchmarking results](#benchmarking-results)). When used with [SIMD optimization](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#simd-optimization-for-the-faiss-engine), 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you index vectors in [OpenSearch 2.13](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/blob/main/release-notes/opensearch-release-notes-2.13.0.md) or later versions, you can configure your k-NN index to apply _scalar quantization_. Scalar quantization converts each dimension of a vector from a 32-bit floating-point (`fp32`) to a 16-bit floating-point (`fp16`) representation. Using the Faiss scalar quantizer (SQfp16), integrated in the k-NN plugin, saves about 50% of the memory with minimal reduction in recall (see [Benchmarking results](#benchmarking-results)). When used with [SIMD optimization](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#simd-optimization-for-the-faiss-engine), 
```

```json
PUT test-index/_doc/1
{
  "my_vector1": [-65504.0, 65503.845, 55.82, -65300.456, 34.67, -1278.23, 90.62, 8.36]
}
```

During querying, there is no range limitation for the query vector:

```json
GET test-index/_search
{
  "size": 2,
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector1": {
        "vector": [265436.876, -120906.256, 99.84, 89.45, 100000.45, 9.23, -70.17, 6.93],
        "k": 2
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## HNSW memory estimation with fp16

The memory required for HNSW is estimated to be `1.1 * (2 * dimension + 8 * M)` bytes/vector.

As an example, assume that you have 1 million vectors with a dimension of 256 and M of 16. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

`1.1 * (2 * 256 + 8 * 16) * 1,000,000 ~= 0.656 GB`

For more information about memory estimation for scalar quantization with the inverted file (IVF) algorithm, refer to [this documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#memory-estimation-1).

## Benchmarking results

We ran benchmarking tests on some popular datasets using our [opensearch-benchmark](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) tool 

> to compare the indexing, search performance, and quality of search results of Faiss scalar quantization. We compared Faiss scalar quantization against using Faiss with float vectors without any encoding. All tests were performed with [SIMD](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/#simd-optimization-for-the-faiss-engine) (Single Instruction Multiple Data).

Reviewer 2: Suggest for clarity: Faiss scalar quantization (FP16) against using Faiss with float vectors without any encoding (FP32)

|m	|ef_construction	|ef_search	|replica|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|16	|100	|100	|0	|

The dataset and other configuration details are listed in the following table.

|Dataset ID	|Dataset	|Vector dimension	|Data size	|Number of queries	|Training data range	|Query data range	|Space type	|Primary shards	|Indexing clients|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|Dataset 1	|gist-960-euclidean	|960	|1,000,000	|1,000	|[ 0.0, 1.48 ]	|[ 0.0, 0.729 ]	|L2	|8	|16|
|Dataset 2	|mnist-784-euclidean	|784	|60,000	|10,000	|[ 0.0, 255.0 ]	|[ 0.0, 255.0 ]	|L2	|1	|2|
|Dataset 3	|cohere-wiki-simple-embeddings-768	|768	|475,858	|10,000	|[ -4.1561704, 5.5478516 ]	|[ -4.065383, 5.4902344 ]	|L2	|4	|8|
|Dataset 4	|cohere-ip-1m	|768	|1,000,000	|10,000	|[ -4.1073565, 5.504557 ]	|[ -4.109505, 5.4809895 ]	|innerproduct	|8	|16|
|Dataset 5	|sift-128-euclidean	|128	|1,000,000	|10,000	|[ 0.0, 218.0 ]	|[ 0.0, 184.0 ]	|L2	|8	|16|

#### Recall and memory results

|Dataset ID	| Faiss hnsw recall@100	 | Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 recall@100	 |Faiss hnsw memory estimate (gb)	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 memory estimate (gb)	|Faiss hnsw memory usage (gb)	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 memory usage (gb)	|% reduction in memory	|

> |---	|--------------------|-------------------------|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|

Reviewer 2: Suggest that % reduction in memory be an integer % -- not 48.12 but 48.

* In most instances, SQfp16 demonstrated better indexing throughput as compared to `fp32` vectors.

## Conclusion

Faiss SQfp16 scalar quantization is a powerful technique that provides significant memory savings while maintaining high recall performance similar to full-precision vectors. Converting vectors to a 16-bit floating-point representation can reduce memory requirements by up to 50%. When combined with SIMD optimization, SQfp16 scalar quantization also enhances indexing throughput and reduces search latency, leading to better overall performance. This method strikes an excellent balance between memory efficiency and accuracy, making it a valuable tool for large-scale similarity search applications.

## Future scope

To achieve even greater memory efficiency, we plan to introduce `int8` quantization support using a [Faiss scalar quantizer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1723) and [Lucene scalar quantizer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1277). 

> This advanced technique will enable a remarkable 75% reduction in memory requirements, or 4x compression, compared to full-precision vectors while maintaining high recall performance. 

Reviewer 2: Rather than saying "while maintaining high recall performance", since this hasn't been measured yet, we could say, "and we expect to find minimal reduction in recall" or something.

The quantizers will accept `fp32` vectors as input, perform online training, and quantize the data into byte-sized vectors, eliminating the need for external quantization or extra training steps.

> Furthermore, we aim to release binary vector support, enabling an unprecedented 32x compression rate. This groundbreaking approach will further reduce memory consumption.

Reviewer 2: remove "groundbreaking"

Reviewer 2: and remove "advanced"

> addition to this we will soon add support for avx512 optimization which helps to further reduce search latency.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
addition, we will soon add support for avx512 optimization, which will further reduce search latency.
```

authors:
  - naveen
  - vamshin
  - tal
date: 2024-06-19 00:00:00 -0700
categories:
  - technical-posts
meta_keywords: FP16 quantization, OpenSearch k-NN plugin, memory optimization, cost-effectiveness
meta_description: Learn how FP16 Quantization in OpenSearch helps to reduce memory requirements upto 50% with a very minimal loss in quality.
has_science_table: true
---

The rise of large language models (LLMs) and generative AI has ushered in a new era of natural language processing capabilities. Vector databases have emerged as a crucial 
component in this landscape, acting as external databases that can efficiently index, store, and retrieve embeddings generated by LLMs. However, as the scale and complexity 
of LLMs continue to grow, vector database workloads have also increased significantly. Ingesting and querying billions of vectors can strain computational resources, 
leading to higher memory requirements and increased operational costs. Faiss scalar quantization enables you to generate vector embeddings with lower precision, which reduces memory consumption and, consequently, lowers costs.

## Why use Faiss scalar quantization?

> When you index vectors in [OpenSearch 2.13](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/blob/main/release-notes/opensearch-release-notes-2.13.0.md) or later versions, you can configure your k-NN index to apply a technique called _scalar quantization_. Scalar quantization converts each dimension of a vector from a 32-bit floating-point (`fp32`) to a 16-bit floating-point (`fp16`) representation. Using the Faiss scalar quantizer (SQfp16), integrated in the k-NN plugin, you can get up to a 50% memory savings with a very minimal loss of recall (see [Benchmarking results](#benchmarking-results)). When used with [SIMD optimization](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#simd-optimization-for-the-faiss-engine), 

Author: IMO upto 50% memory savings looks easy to understand than the later. @smacrakis can you pls confirm what would be better from customer POV ?

> When you index vectors in [OpenSearch 2.13](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/blob/main/release-notes/opensearch-release-notes-2.13.0.md) or later versions, you can configure your k-NN index to apply a technique called _scalar quantization_. Scalar quantization converts each dimension of a vector from a 32-bit floating-point (`fp32`) to a 16-bit floating-point (`fp16`) representation. Using the Faiss scalar quantizer (SQfp16), integrated in the k-NN plugin, you can get up to a 50% memory savings with a very minimal loss of recall (see [Benchmarking results](#benchmarking-results)). When used with [SIMD optimization](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#simd-optimization-for-the-faiss-engine), 

Author: Sounds good but we might need to use "up to" instead of "about" because few people think that it provides flat 50% off. But, that's not the case

`[65510.82, -65504.1]`, the vector will be indexed as a 16-bit vector `[65504.0, -65504.0]`.

**Note**: We recommend setting `clip` to `true` only if very few elements lie outside of the supported range. Rounding the values may cause a drop in recall.

During ingestion, make sure each dimension of the vector is in the supported range ([-65504.0, 65504.0]):

```json
PUT test-index/_doc/1
{
  "my_vector1": [-65504.0, 65503.845, 55.82, -65300.456, 34.67, -1278.23, 90.62, 8.36]
}
```

During querying, there is no range limitation for the query vector:

```json
GET test-index/_search
{
  "size": 2,
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector1": {
        "vector": [265436.876, -120906.256, 99.84, 89.45, 100000.45, 9.23, -70.17, 6.93],
        "k": 2
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## HNSW memory estimation with fp16

The memory required for HNSW is estimated to be `1.1 * (2 * dimension + 8 * M)` bytes/vector.

As an example, assume that you have 1 million vectors with a dimension of 256 and M of 16. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

`1.1 * (2 * 256 + 8 * 16) * 1,000,000 ~= 0.656 GB`

> For more information about memory estimation for scalar quantization with IVF, refer to [this documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#memory-estimation-1).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more information about memory estimation for scalar quantization with the inverted file (IVF) algorithm, refer to [this documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#memory-estimation-1).
```

> For more information about memory estimation for scalar quantization with IVF, refer to [this documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#memory-estimation-1).

Author: I believe HNSW will be widely used than IVF due to drop in recall with IVF. So, we intentionally added estimates for HNSW here

## Benchmarking results

We ran benchmarking tests on some of the popular and trending datasets using our [opensearch-benchmark](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) tool 
to compare the indexing, search performance, and the quality of search results of Faiss scalar quantization. We compared Faiss scalar quantization against using Faiss with float vectors without any encoding. All tests were performed with [SIMD](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/#simd-optimization-for-the-faiss-engine) 
enabled on x86 architecture with AVX2 optimization.

**Note**: Without SIMD optimization (AVX2 or NEON) or with AVX2 disabled(on x86 architecture), the quantization process introduces additional overhead, which leads to an increase in latencies. 

> For information about processors that support AVX2, see [CPUs with AVX2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Vector_Extensions#CPUs_with_AVX2). In AWS, all community AMIs with [HVM](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/virtualization_types.html) support AVX2 optimization for the x86 architecture.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For information about processors that support AVX2, see [CPUs with AVX2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Vector_Extensions#CPUs_with_AVX2). In AWS, all community Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) with [HVM](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/virtualization_types.html) support AVX2 optimization for the x86 architecture.
```

> For information about processors that support AVX2, see [CPUs with AVX2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Vector_Extensions#CPUs_with_AVX2). In AWS, all community AMIs with [HVM](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/virtualization_types.html) support AVX2 optimization for the x86 architecture.

Reviewer 4: "In AWS" => "In an AWS environment"?

### Benchmarking results using small workloads

> We ran the following tests on a single-node cluster without any replicas using the following datasets.

Reviewer 4: Is "using the following datasets" necessary here?

Author: not important, will remove it

#### Configuration

|m	|ef_construction	|ef_search	|replica|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|16	|100	|100	|0	|

> The dataset details and other configuration are listed below:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Dataset details and other configuration are listed in the following table.
```

> The dataset details and other configuration are listed below:

Reviewer 4: Missing word after "configuration".

> |Dataset ID	|Dataset	|Dimension of vector	|Data size	|Number of queries	|Training data range	|Query data range	|Space type	|Primary shards	|Indexing clients|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Dataset ID	|Dataset	|Vector dimension	|Data size	|Number of queries	|Training data range	|Query data range	|Space type	|Primary shards	|Indexing clients|
```

#### Recall and memory results

|Dataset ID	| Faiss hnsw recall@100	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 recall@100	|Faiss hnsw memory estimate (gb)	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 memory estimate (gb)	|Faiss hnsw memory usage (gb)	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 memory usage (gb)	|% reduction in memory	|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|Dataset 1	|0.9071	|0.9072	|4.07	|2.10	|3.72	|1.93	|48.12 |
|Dataset 2	|0.9889	|0.9889	|0.20	|0.10	|0.18	|0.10	|44.44|
|Dataset 3	|0.9456	|0.9450	|1.56	|0.81	|1.43	|0.75	|47.55|
|Dataset 4	|0.9429	|0.9422	|3.28	|1.70	|3.00	|1.57	|47.67|
|Dataset 5	|0.9925	|0.9925	|0.66	|0.39	|0.62	|0.38	|38.71|

#### Indexing and query results

|Dataset ID	|Faiss hnsw mean throughput (docs/sec)	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 mean throughput (docs/sec)	|Faiss hnsw p90 (ms)	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 p90 (ms)	|Faiss hnsw p99 (ms)	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 p99 (ms)	|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|Dataset 1	|4681	|4696	|4.97	|5.08	|5.54	|5.50|
|Dataset 2	|4271	|4580	|2.01	|2.06	|2.16	|2.21|
|Dataset 3	|4690	|4698	|3.35	|3.33	|3.58	|3.57|
|Dataset 4	|6044	|6129	|4.61	|4.81	|5.16	|5.37|
|Dataset 5	|115499	|102060	|2.73	|2.68	|2.96	|2.89|

#### Analysis

When comparing the benchmarking results, note that:

> * The recall obtained using Faiss HNSW SQfp16 matches that of Faiss HNSW (with negligible difference).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The recall obtained using Faiss HNSW SQfp16 matches that of Faiss HNSW (with a negligible difference).
```

* Using SQfp16, there is a significant reduction in memory usage of up to **48%**, with a slight reduction in disk usage. These results indicate that a larger vector dimension leads to greater memory reduction.

> * The performance metrics using SQfp16 are on par with those of `fp32` vectors.

Reviewer 4: When using SQfp16, the performance metrics are similar to those of `fp32` vectors"?

> * The performance metrics using SQfp16 are on par with those of `fp32` vectors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* When using SQfp16, the performance metrics are similar to those of `fp32` vectors.

```

### Benchmarking results using large workloads

To compare performance metrics and memory savings, we ran tests on the large-scale [Laion](https://laion.ai/about/) 100M dataset with 768 dimensions, using both Faiss HNSW SQfp16 and Faiss HNSW.

#### Configuration

|	|Faiss HNSW SQfp16	|Faiss HNSW	|
|---	|---	|---	|
|OpenSearch version	|2.13	|2.13	|

> |engine	|faiss	|faiss	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Engine	|faiss	|faiss	|
```

> |Dimension of vector	|768	|768	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Vector dimension	|768	|768	|
```

> |ingest vectors	|100M	|100M	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Ingest vectors	|100M	|100M	|
```

> |test vectors	|1k	|1k	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Test vectors	|1k	|1k	|
```

> |primary shards	|36	|36	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Primary shards	|36	|36	|
```

> |replica shards	|0	|0	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Replica shards	|0	|0	|
```

> |data nodes	|4	|8	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Data nodes	|4	|8	|
```

> |data node instance type	|r5.4xlarge	|r5.4xlarge	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Data node instance type	|r5.4xlarge	|r5.4xlarge	|
```

> |master nodes	|3	|3	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Master nodes	|3	|3	|
```

> |master nodes	|3	|3	|

Reviewer 4: "Master" => "Cluster manager"?

> |master node instance type	|c5.xlarge	|c5.xlarge	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Master node instance type	|c5.xlarge	|c5.xlarge	|
```

> |master node instance type	|c5.xlarge	|c5.xlarge	|

Reviewer 4: "Master" => "Cluster manager"?

> |indexing clients	|9	|9	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Indexing clients	|9	|9	|
```

> |query clients	|1	|1	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Query clients	|1	|1	|
```

> |forcemerge segments	|1	|1	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Force merge segments	|1	|1	|
```

> |client instance	|r5.16xlarge	|r5.16xlarge	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|Client instance	|r5.16xlarge	|r5.16xlarge	|
```

> Config ID	|Optimization Strategy	|m	|ef_construction	|ef_search	|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Config ID	|Optimization strategy	|m	|ef_construction	|ef_search	|
```

|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|hnsw1	|Default configuration	|16	|100	|100	|
|hnsw2	|Balance between latency, memory, and recall	|16	|128	|128	|
|hnsw3	|Optimize for recall	|16	|256	|256	|

> Faiss HNSW SQfp16 requires 4 data nodes, half the number needed for Faiss HNSW (8). This demonstrates that SQfp16 reduces memory requirements by 50%. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Faiss HNSW SQfp16 requires 4 data nodes---half the number needed for Faiss HNSW (8). This demonstrates that SQfp16 reduces memory requirements by 50%. 
```

> For more information about estimating required memory and number of data nodes, see the [Appendix](#appendix-memory-and-data-node-requirement-estimation).

Reviewer 4: "the" should precede either "required" or "number".

> For more information about estimating required memory and number of data nodes, see the [Appendix](#appendix-memory-and-data-node-requirement-estimation).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more information about estimating the required memory and number of data nodes, see the [Appendix](#appendix-memory-and-data-node-requirement-estimation).
```

#### Recall and memory results

|Experiment ID	|hnsw-recall@1000	|hnsw-sqfp16-recall@1000	|hnsw memory usage (gb)	|hnsw-sqfp16 memory usage (gb)	|% reduction in memory	|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|hnsw 1	|0.94	|0.94	|300.28	|157.23	|47.64	|
|hnsw 2	|0.96	|0.96	|300.28	|157.23	|47.64	|
|hnsw 3	|0.98	|0.98	|300.28	|157.23	|47.64	|

#### Indexing and query results

|Experiment ID	|hnsw mean throughput (docs/sec)	|hnsw-sqfp16 mean throughput (docs/sec)	|hnsw p90 (ms)	|hnsw-sqfp16 p90 (ms)	|hnsw p99 (ms)	|hnsw-sqfp16 p99 (ms)	|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|hnsw 1	|7544	|7657	|14.02	|16.99	|19.18	|20.83	|
|hnsw 2	|7063	|7219	|14.21	|17.44	|18.86	|21.80	|
|hnsw 3	|6004	|5848	|16.14	|20.85	|17.65	|24.73	|

#### Analysis

* For k=1000, the recall is identical for both Faiss HNSW and Faiss HNSW with SQfp16.

> * Faiss HNSW with SQfp16 requires approximately half the memory Faiss HNSW required (as measured by the required number of data nodes). Based on the [k-NN stats API metrics](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/api/#stats), the memory usage has been reduced by 47.64% using SQfp16.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Faiss HNSW with SQfp16 requires approximately half the memory as Faiss HNSW (as measured by the required number of data nodes). Based on the [k-NN stats API metrics](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/api/#stats), the memory usage was reduced by 47.64% by using SQfp16.
```

> * In most instances, SQfp16 demonstrated better indexing throughput compared to `fp32` vectors.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* In most instances, SQfp16 demonstrated better indexing throughput as compared to `fp32` vectors.
```

## Conclusion

> Faiss FP16 scalar quantization is a powerful technique that provides significant memory savings while maintaining high recall performance similar to full-precision vectors. By converting vectors to a 16-bit floating-point representation, it can reduce memory requirements by up to 50%. When combined with SIMD (Single Instruction Multiple Data) optimization, FP16 scalar quantization also enhances indexing throughput and reduces search latencies, leading to better overall performance. This method strikes an excellent balance between memory efficiency and accuracy, making it a valuable tool for large-scale similarity search applications.

Reviewer 4: I don't believe we've used "FP16" in this format previously. SIMD should be defined on line 119.

Reviewer 4: The acronym should be defined where it first appears, and just the acronym should be used thereafter.

Author: Makes sense. Will update it

> Faiss FP16 scalar quantization is a powerful technique that provides significant memory savings while maintaining high recall performance similar to full-precision vectors. By converting vectors to a 16-bit floating-point representation, it can reduce memory requirements by up to 50%. When combined with SIMD (Single Instruction Multiple Data) optimization, FP16 scalar quantization also enhances indexing throughput and reduces search latencies, leading to better overall performance. This method strikes an excellent balance between memory efficiency and accuracy, making it a valuable tool for large-scale similarity search applications.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Faiss FP16 scalar quantization is a powerful technique that provides significant memory savings while maintaining high recall performance similar to full-precision vectors. Converting vectors to a 16-bit floating-point representation can reduce memory requirements by up to 50%. When combined with SIMD optimization, FP16 scalar quantization also enhances indexing throughput and reduces search latency, leading to better overall performance. This method strikes an excellent balance between memory efficiency and accuracy, making it a valuable tool for large-scale similarity search applications.
```

> Faiss FP16 scalar quantization is a powerful technique that provides significant memory savings while maintaining high recall performance similar to full-precision vectors. By converting vectors to a 16-bit floating-point representation, it can reduce memory requirements by up to 50%. When combined with SIMD (Single Instruction Multiple Data) optimization, FP16 scalar quantization also enhances indexing throughput and reduces search latencies, leading to better overall performance. This method strikes an excellent balance between memory efficiency and accuracy, making it a valuable tool for large-scale similarity search applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Faiss FP16 scalar quantization is a powerful technique that provides significant memory savings while maintaining high recall performance similar to full-precision vectors. By converting vectors to a 16-bit floating-point representation, it can reduce memory requirements by up to 50%. When combined with SIMD optimization, FP16 scalar quantization also enhances indexing throughput and reduces search latencies, leading to better overall performance. This method strikes an excellent balance between memory efficiency and accuracy, making it a valuable tool for large-scale similarity search applications.
```

## Future scope

> To achieve an even greater memory efficiency, we plan to introduce `int8` quantization support using a [Faiss scalar quantizer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1723) and [Lucene scalar quantizer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1277). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To achieve even greater memory efficiency, we plan to introduce `int8` quantization support using a [Faiss scalar quantizer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1723) and [Lucene scalar quantizer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1277). 
```

> This advanced technique will enable a remarkable 75% reduction in memory requirements, or 4x compression, compared to full-precision vectors, while maintaining high recall performance. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This advanced technique will enable a remarkable 75% reduction in memory requirements, or 4x compression, compared to full-precision vectors while maintaining high recall performance. 
```

> The quantizers will accept FP32 vectors as input, perform online training, and quantize the data into byte-sized vectors, eliminating the need for an external quantization or extra training steps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The quantizers will accept FP32 vectors as input, perform online training, and quantize the data into byte-sized vectors, eliminating the need for external quantization or extra training steps.
```

> The quantizers will accept FP32 vectors as input, perform online training, and quantize the data into byte-sized vectors, eliminating the need for an external quantization or extra training steps.

Reviewer 4: Should "FP32" be `fp32`?

Furthermore, we aim to release binary vector support, enabling an unprecedented 32x compression rate. This groundbreaking approach will further reduce memory consumption. 
By combining these cutting-edge quantization techniques, we will provide a comprehensive solution for efficient similarity search, balancing memory optimization and 
accurate retrieval.

> Our commitment to continuous innovation delivers state-of-the-art technologies to tackle large-scale similarity search challenges while minimizing resource 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our commitment to continual innovation delivers state-of-the-art technologies for tackling large-scale similarity search challenges while minimizing resource 
```

Reviewer 2: I think "continuous innovation" works better than "continual innovation". I'd prefer avoiding sports metaphors like "tackling" and stay with "addressing". I think "state of the art" and "challenges" are vacuous. How about:

Our ongoing analysis and tuning of OpenSearch lets you address large-scale similarity search while minimizing resource....

> Our commitment to continuous innovation delivers state-of-the-art technologies to tackle large-scale similarity search challenges while minimizing resource 

Reviewer 4: We probably don't need this sentence.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. "Cutting-edge" again is vacuous.

requirements and maximizing cost-effectiveness.

## Appendix: Memory and data node requirement estimation

> The following calculations provide a memory and number of data nodes estimation for the 100M, 768 dimension large workload benchmarking test.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following calculations provide an estimation of the memory and number of data nodes for the 100M, 768-dimension large workload benchmarking test:
```

> The following calculations provide a memory and number of data nodes estimation for the 100M, 768 dimension large workload benchmarking test.

Reviewer 4: This sentence reads a bit awkwardly. Can we revise for clarity? Also, should the word "requirements" be in here somewhere?

Author: Ack

```
// Faiss HNSW SQfp16 Memory Estimation
1.1 * (2 * dimension + 8 * M) * num_of_vectors * (1 + num_of_replicas) bytes

Let m = 16 and num_replicas = 0

1.1 * (2 * 768 + 8 * 16) * 100000000 * (1 + 0) = 170.47 gb = 171 gb

Instance r5.4xlarge has a memory of 128 gb in which 32 gb is used for JVM. 
Let us assume circuit breaker limit is 0.5

Total available memory = (data node instance memory - jvm memory) * circuit breaker limit
Total available memory = (128 - 32 ) * 0.5 = 48gb

Number of Data nodes -> 171/48 = 3.56 = 4
```

```
// Faiss HNSW Memory Estimation
1.1 * (4 * dimension + 8 * M) * num_of_vectors * (1 + num_of_replicas) bytes

Let m = 16 and num_replicas = 0

1.1 * (4 * 768 + 8 * 16) * 100000000 * (1 + 0) = 327.83 gb = 328 gb

Instance r5.4xlarge has a memory of 128 gb in which 32 gb is used for JVM. 
Let us assume circuit breaker limit is 0.5

Total available memory = (data node instance memory - jvm memory) * circuit breaker limit
Total available memory = (128 - 32 ) * 0.5 = 48gb

Number of Data nodes -> 328/48 = 6.83 = 7 + 1(for stability) = 8
```

## References

* [Benchmarking datasets](https://github.com/erikbern/ann-benchmarks?tab=readme-ov-file#data-sets)

> * [Cohere/wikipedia-22-12-simple-embeddings ](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Cohere/wikipedia-22-12-simple-embeddings)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* [Cohere/wikipedia-22-12-simple-embeddings](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Cohere/wikipedia-22-12-simple-embeddings)
```

authors:
  - naveen
  - vamshin
  - tal
date: 2024-06-19 00:00:00 -0700
categories:
  - technical-posts
meta_keywords: FP16 quantization, OpenSearch k-NN plugin, memory optimization, cost-effectiveness
meta_description: Learn how FP16 Quantization in OpenSearch helps to reduce memory requirements upto 50% with a very minimal loss in quality.
has_science_table: true
---

The rise of large language models (LLMs) and generative AI has ushered in a new era of natural language processing capabilities. Vector databases have emerged as a crucial 
component in this landscape, acting as external databases that can efficiently index, store, and retrieve embeddings generated by LLMs. However, as the scale and complexity 
of LLMs continue to grow, vector database workloads have also increased significantly. Ingesting and querying billions of vectors can strain computational resources, 
leading to higher memory requirements and increased operational costs. Faiss scalar quantization enables you to generate vector embeddings with lower precision, which reduces memory consumption and, consequently, lowers costs.

## Why use Faiss scalar quantization?

> When you index vectors in [OpenSearch 2.13](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/blob/main/release-notes/opensearch-release-notes-2.13.0.md) or later versions, you can configure your k-NN index to apply a technique called _scalar quantization_. Scalar quantization converts each dimension of a vector from a 32-bit floating-point (`fp32`) to a 16-bit floating-point (`fp16`) representation. Using the Faiss scalar quantizer (SQfp16), integrated in the k-NN plugin, you can get up to a 50% memory savings with a very minimal loss of recall (see [Benchmarking results](#benchmarking-results)). When used with [SIMD optimization](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#simd-optimization-for-the-faiss-engine), 

Reviewer 2: "to apply a technique called _scalar quantization_" => "to apply  _scalar quantization_". No need for "a technique called", especially since the next sentence defines it.

SQfp16 quantization can also significantly reduce search latencies and improve indexing throughput.

## How to use Faiss scalar quantization

To use Faiss scalar quantization, set the k-NN vector field's `method.parameters.encoder.name` to `sq` when creating a k-NN index:

```json
PUT /test-index
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "knn": true
    }
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector1": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "method": {
          "name": "hnsw",
          "engine": "faiss",
          "space_type": "l2",
          "parameters": {
            "encoder": {
              "name": "sq",
              "parameters": {
                "type": "fp16",
                "clip": true
              }
            },
            "ef_construction": 256,
            "m": 8
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

For more information about the SQ parameters, see the [k-NN documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/#sq-parameters).

> The `fp16` encoder converts 32-bit vectors into their 16-bit counterparts. For this encoder type, the vector values must be in the **[-65504.0, 65504.0]** range.

Reviewer 2: Where does 65504 = 2^16-32 come from? 
Also,rephrase as "in the range **[-65504.0, 65504.0]**."

Author: This can express values in the range ±65,504, with the minimum value above 1 being 1 + 1/1024.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Half-precision_floating-point_format

> The preceding index mapping request specifies the `clip` parameter, which defines how to handle out-of-range values:

Reviewer 2: The preceding index mapping request specifies the `clip` parameter, which defines how to handle out-of-range values => The `clip` parameter above specifies how to handle out-of-range values:

* By default, `clip` is `false`, and any vectors containing out-of-range values are rejected.
* When `clip` is set to `true`, out of-range vector values are rounded up or down so that they are in the supported range. For example, if the original 32-bit vector is 

> `[65510.82, -65504.1]`, the vector will be indexed as a 16-bit vector `[65504.0, -65504.0]`.

Reviewer 2: It is confusing to use the same notation for a vector and for a range of values. Maybe the range specification above should be written as "in the range **-65504.0 .. 65504.0**"?

During ingestion, make sure each dimension of the vector is within the supported range ([-65504.0, 65504.0]):

```json
PUT test-index/_doc/1
{
  "my_vector1": [-65504.0, 65503.845, 55.82, -65300.456, 34.67, -1278.23, 90.62, 8.36]
}
```

During querying, there is no range limitation for the query vector:

```json
GET test-index/_search
{
  "size": 2,
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector1": {
        "vector": [265436.876, -120906.256, 99.84, 89.45, 100000.45, 9.23, -70.17, 6.93],
        "k": 2
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## HNSW memory estimation with fp16

The memory required for HNSW is estimated to be `1.1 * (2 * dimension + 8 * M)` bytes/vector.

As an example, assume that you have 1 million vectors with a dimension of 256 and M of 16. The memory requirement can be estimated as follows:

`1.1 * (2 * 256 + 8 * 16) * 1,000,000 ~= 0.656 GB`

For more information about memory estimation for scalar quantization with the inverted file (IVF) algorithm, refer to [this documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#memory-estimation-1).

## Benchmarking results

> We ran benchmarking tests on some popular and trending datasets using our [opensearch-benchmark](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) tool 

Reviewer 2: What is a "trending dataset"?

Author: sorry, removed it

|m	|ef_construction	|ef_search	|replica|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|16	|100	|100	|0	|

The dataset and other configuration details are listed in the following table.

|Dataset ID	|Dataset	|Vector dimension	|Data size	|Number of queries	|Training data range	|Query data range	|Space type	|Primary shards	|Indexing clients|
|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|
|Dataset 1	|gist-960-euclidean	|960	|1,000,000	|1,000	|[ 0.0, 1.48 ]	|[ 0.0, 0.729 ]	|L2	|8	|16|
|Dataset 2	|mnist-784-euclidean	|784	|60,000	|10,000	|[ 0.0, 255.0 ]	|[ 0.0, 255.0 ]	|L2	|1	|2|
|Dataset 3	|cohere-wiki-simple-embeddings-768	|768	|475,858	|10,000	|[ -4.1561704, 5.5478516 ]	|[ -4.065383, 5.4902344 ]	|L2	|4	|8|
|Dataset 4	|cohere-ip-1m	|768	|1,000,000	|10,000	|[ -4.1073565, 5.504557 ]	|[ -4.109505, 5.4809895 ]	|innerproduct	|8	|16|
|Dataset 5	|sift-128-euclidean	|128	|1,000,000	|10,000	|[ 0.0, 218.0 ]	|[ 0.0, 184.0 ]	|L2	|8	|16|

#### Recall and memory results

|Dataset ID	| Faiss hnsw recall@100	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 recall@100	|Faiss hnsw memory estimate (gb)	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 memory estimate (gb)	|Faiss hnsw memory usage (gb)	|Faiss hnsw-sqfp16 memory usage (gb)	|% reduction in memory	|

> |---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|---	|

Reviewer 2: Are four digits really meaningful for recall? I'd think two would be enough (0.91, not 0.9071).

Author: If we round it to two digits, users might think that the recall would be same with fp32 or fp16 but it is actually not as there would be a slight drop in recall with fp16. So, want to show that difference to make it more transparent

Reviewer 2: In Dataset 1, recall actually _increases_ by 0.0001. That is clearly not meaningful.
And I would claim that all the other differences are so small that they are not meaningful.
The lesson is not that we need to report four digits, but that we need to report cases which show a meaningful difference. For example, what is recall @10? (Too late for this doc, but you get the idea.)

Author: For dataset1, that could be due to some noise which I believe can be ignored. If you feel that it is negligible and can be ignored, I will round them to 2 digits.

recall@10 signifies recall measuring at k=10. Unfortunately, we don't have metrics for other values of k to show those tradeoffs. But, will make a note of it and will add those in the future blogs.

This advanced technique will enable a remarkable 75% reduction in memory requirements, or 4x compression, compared to full-precision vectors while maintaining high recall performance. 
The quantizers will accept `fp32` vectors as input, perform online training, and quantize the data into byte-sized vectors, eliminating the need for external quantization or extra training steps.

Furthermore, we aim to release binary vector support, enabling an unprecedented 32x compression rate. This groundbreaking approach will further reduce memory consumption. 
By combining these cutting-edge quantization techniques, we will provide a comprehensive solution for efficient similarity search, balancing memory optimization and 
accurate retrieval.

Our commitment to continuous innovation delivers state-of-the-art technologies to tackle large-scale similarity search challenges while minimizing resource 
requirements and maximizing cost-effectiveness.

## Appendix: Memory and data node requirement estimation

> The following calculations provide an estimation of the memory and number of data nodes for the 100M, 768-dimension large workload benchmarking test:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following calculations provide an estimation of the memory and number of data nodes required for the 100M, 768-dimension large workload benchmarking test:
```
